Integrated Analysis of Acetyl-CoA and Histone Modification via Mass Spectrometry to Investigate Metabolically Driven Acetylation
Summary
Acetylation is a highly abundant and dynamic post-translational modification (PTM) on histone proteins which, when present on chromatin bound histones, facilitates the accessibility of DNA for gene transcription. The central metabolite, acetyl-CoA, is a substrate for acetyltransferases, which catalyze protein acetylation. Acetyl-CoA is an essential intermediate in diverse metabolic pathways, and cellular acetyl-CoA levels fluctuate according to extracellular nutrient availability and the metabolic state of the cell. The Michaelis constant (Km) of most histone acetyltransferases (HATs), which specifically target histone proteins, fall within the range of cellular acetyl-CoA concentrations. As a consequence, global levels of histone acetylation are often restricted by availability of acetyl-CoA. Such metabolic regulation of histone acetylation is important for cell proliferation, differentiation and a variety of cellular functions. In cancer, numerous oncogenic signaling events hijack cellular metabolism, ultimately inducing an extensive rearrangement of the epigenetic state of the cell. Understanding metabolic control of the epigenome through histone acetylation is essential to illuminate the molecular mechanisms by which cells sense, adapt and occasionally disengage nutrient fluctuations and environmental cues from gene expression. In particular, targeting metabolic regulators or even dietary interventions to impact acetyl-CoA availability and histone acetylation is a promising target in cancer therapy. Liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (LC-MS) is the most accurate methodology to quantify protein PTMs and metabolites. In this chapter, we present state-of-the-art protocols to analyze histone acetylation and acetyl-CoA. Histones are extracted and digested into short peptides (4-20 aa) prior to LC-MS. Acetyl-CoA is extracted from cells and analyzed using an analogous mass spectrometry-based procedure. Model systems can be fed with isotopically labeled substrates to investigate the metabolic preference for acetyl-CoA production and the metabolic dependence and turnover of histone acetylation. We also present an example of data integration to correlate changes in acetyl-CoA production with histone acetylation.
Introduction
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) of histone proteins are important epigenetic signals that change the physical accessibility of the genome. Histone PTMs affect DNA-protein interactions and, subsequently, gene transcription, without altering the underlying DNA sequence. Lysine acetylation is a widespread histone PTM and is catalyzed by a class of enzymes known as histone acetyl-transferases (HATs). The core histone proteins (H2A, H2B, H3 and H4) form the nucleosome structure around which DNA is tightly wrapped. Core histone proteins can be acetylated on multiple residues; notably, histones have long unstructured tails that protrude from the nucleosome that can be abundantly acetylated. Histones are enriched in basic amino acid residues (Arg and Lys) making them positively charged. Acetylation of lysine residues neutralizes this positive charge, relaxing the interaction of the nucleosomes with the negatively charged DNA. Thus, histone acetylation is usually associated with chromatin openness (euchromatin), characterized by accessibility to transcription factors and other DNA-associated proteins, and active gene transcription. In addition to its physical impact on nuclear architecture, acetylated histone lysines are recognized by specific protein domains (bromodomains) usually found in potent gene activators. A varied set of enzymes, known as histone deacetylases (HDACs), catalyze a rapid and energetically inexpensive removal of acetyl moieties from histones. Altogether, histone acetylation is a dynamic and reversible chromatin modification that allows cells to rapidly and potently modulate gene expression in order to adapt to extracellular stimuli. However, it is now clear that levels of histone acetylation can also be influenced by availability of the universal acetyl donor, acetyl-CoA. Acetyl-CoA is an essential intermediate in diverse metabolic pathways and cellular acetyl-CoA levels fluctuate according to extracellular nutrient availability and the metabolic state of the cell. Acetyl-CoA cannot cross the mitochondrial membrane, so only acetyl-CoA generated in the nucleo-cytoplasmic compartment is accessible for histone modification. In most cell settings, acetyl-CoA is produced in the nucleo-cytoplasmic compartment from citrate through the activity of ATP-Citrate Lyase (ACLY) (Figure 1A). Citrate generated in the mitochondrial TCA cycle is exported to fuel this process. As glucose is the primary substrate for TCA cycle activity in a number of settings, glucose limitation has been shown to restrict acetyl-CoA availability and decrease global levels of histone acetylation (Figure 1B). Importantly, cancer cells, as well as highly specialized cell types can channel TCA carbon units into acetyl-CoA to sustain high levels of histone acetylation even when glucose is limiting or poorly utilized. For example, activation of PI3K/Akt signaling in cancer cells leads to phosphorylation of ACLY on Serine 455, which increases enzymatic activity of approximately 6 fold and elevates acetyl-CoA and histone acetylation levels also in glucose limiting conditions. Multiple groups have also shown that cells can utilize alternative carbon sources to produce acetyl-CoA, in particular acetate, which can be converted to acetyl-CoA by the acyl-coenzymeA synthetase short chain family member 2 (ACSS2). Although acetate-derived acetyl-CoA is less efficiently incorporated into histones, contribution of acetate to histone acetylation is significantly enhanced under some conditions (e.g.: hypoxia).
Acetyl-CoA is highly unstable, so the appropriate use of isotope labeled internal standard is recommended for accurate quantitation. Mass spectrometry (MS) is the most reliable approach for the quantification of acetyl-CoA. Enzyme based assays for acetyl-CoA quantitation suffer from sensitivity and specificity issues and cannot incorporate appropriate internal standards to account for sample degradation. Internal standards added in equal amounts are used to normalize every sample accounting for sample loss and degradation. Exact quantitation can be achieved by comparing sample ratios to a standard curve generated by a serial dilution of known amounts of acetyl-CoA standards. Internal standard can be generated cheaply in yeast through stable isotope labeling of essential nutrients in cell culture (SILEC) where cells are fed with heavy labeled [13C315N1]-vitamin B5, which is incorporated into the CoA backbone of acetyl-CoA. The characteristic fragmentation pattern of Acetyl-CoA with MS/MS detection, ensures highly specific quantitation.
Antibody-based techniques such as Western blotting have been extensively adopted to characterize histone modifications, including acetylation. However, this approach is limited in throughput and sometimes specificity, as antibodies often cross-react with similar histone marks and multiple PTMs. A recent assessment of commercial antibodies found that more than 25% fail specificity tests in dot blot and Western blot experiments, and about 20% of antibodies fail in ChIP-seq experiments due to non-specific antibody binding. In contrast, MS platforms can achieve high specificity and sensitivity, with automation facilitating high-throughput analyses. MS has thus become the most suitable analytical tool to study both Acetyl-CoA and histone modifications in general (reviewed in).
In this chapter, we describe an integrated workflow to probe acetyl-CoA fluctuations and changes in histone acetylation. The protocol is designed for the analysis of multiple histone acetyl marks. Schematic representation of our approach is showed in Figure 2. Even though the protocol is primarily prepared for cell culture studies, adaptability to in vivo analysis of histone modifications and acetyl-CoA availability will be discussed.
References
pathways leading to histone acetylation.
(A) Acetyl-CoA is commonly produced by processing of either glucose or acetate. Citrate is converted into acetyl-CoA by the ATP-Citrate Lyase (ACLY), while acetate is processed into acetyl-CoA by the enzyme Acetate Sinthetase 2 (ACSS2). (B) Increased availability of acetyl-CoA correlates with elevated histone acetylation.
proposed workflow.
Cell cultures can be grown in the presence of either normal (represented by blue medium) or labeled (green medium) nutrients. Labeled histones and metabolites can be analyzed in parallel, according to different protocols. Quantification of either is performed by LC-MS analysis. Data can then be integrated for correlation analysis.
tip pulling for nanocolumns.
(A) Capillaries should be secured on a rigid surface, e.g. by using tape. (B) Heating combined with gentle pulling elongates the capillary into a smaller and smaller internal diameter, until it detaches from the surface as a pulled needle. (C) This needle is frequently a non-rigid end, similar to a hair. This end has no internal diameter, preventing any liquid to pass through it. (D) By gently breaking the non-rigid part of the tip (e.g. with a finger), a normal size tip is created. This capillary is ready to be packed and become a nanocolumn for LC-MS.
example of histone peptide and acetyl-CoA spectra before and after metabolic labeling.
(A) Left: acetyl-CoA chemical structure. The acetyl group (R - 2 carbon atoms) is attached to the Coenzyme A backbone through a thioester bond. Right: glucose, acetate and other nutrient provide the carbon atoms to the acetyl group. Using isotope labeling, 13C atoms can be incorporated into acetyl-CoA (carbons highlighted in red in the structure; each +1 Da). Rate of incorporation and carbon source depends on the metabolic activity of the cell and may be studied with the approach presented here. (B) The spectra display how the isotopic pattern of histone peptides (top) and acetyl-CoA (bottom) change after growing fast replicating cells into a media containing isotopically heavy glucose (+6 Da). A histone peptide carrying a single acetylation increments its third isotope (+2 Da), as only two 13C carbon atoms are incorporated into the acetyl group. With time, the relative abundance of the heavy isotope increase until the unlabeled acetylation disappears from the signal. Acetyl-CoA gets labeled in multiple carbon residues, as the CoA group is also synthesized using glucose. Therefore, the isotopes increasing their relative abundance are multiple.
representative workflow for data analysis.
(A) Raw data produced by EpiProfile are the area of the extracted ion chromatogram of selected histone peptides (currently ~300) and acetyl-CoA. EpiProfile can also extract ion chromatograms of histone peptides carrying isotopically labeled acetylations. (B) The raw intensity is automatically converted into a relative abundance by dividing the intensity of each peptide by the sum of all peptides (both unmodified and labeled with heavy carbons) sharing the same amino acid sequence. (C) Plotting and analysis of differentially-modified histone species and/or metabolite isotopomers (recommended statistics is based on t-test or ANOVA). (D) The relative changes of histone acetylation can be compared with relative changes of acetyl-CoA when comparing samples A and B, so that a correlation can be performed to predict causes of global regulation of histone acetylation. (E) Validation can be performed by, e.g. western blotting. (F) Data-driven hypotheses are easier to formulate when both histone and acetyl-CoA data are acquired.
Mass transitions for relevant acetyl-CoA isotopologues in MS positive mode.
